Fix description vs document terminology (#4100)
OAI/OpenAPI-Specification: versions/3.0.4.md

Occasionally, non-backwards compatible changes may be made in `minor` versions of the OAS where impact is believed to be low relative to the benefit provided.

> An OpenAPI description document compatible with OAS 3.\*.\* contains a required [`openapi`](#oas-version) field which designates the version of the OAS that it uses.

Reviewer: Discussed on today's call that `OpenAPI document` is ok to move forward with, and we'll define what that means separately.

> An OpenAPI Description compatible with OAS 3.\*.\* contains a required [`openapi`](#oas-version) field which designates the version of the OAS that it uses.

Reviewer 2: How about
```suggestion
An OpenAPI [entry document](#openapi-description-structure) compatible with OAS 3.\*.\* contains a required [`openapi`](#oas-version) field which designates the version of the OAS that it uses.
```

Reviewer 3: @ralfhandl line 92:  Sounds reasonably good to me.

Reviewer 4: Same objection to restricting this to entry documents as in the other thread.

> An OpenAPI Description compatible with OAS 3.\*.\* contains a required [`openapi`](#oas-version) field which designates the version of the OAS that it uses.

Reviewer 5: +1 on the bit about it being about a document.

As far as the second part.  Our tooling always normalizes OpenAPI documents to the latest version, so having an OpenAPI Description that consists of documents with different major versions is actually possible. Assuming the version transformation was successful on reading.

> An OpenAPI Description compatible with OAS 3.\*.\* contains a required [`openapi`](#oas-version) field which designates the version of the OAS that it uses.

Reviewer 4: > so having an OpenAPI Description that consists of documents with different major versions is actually possible. Assuming the version transformation was successful on reading.

But from the point of view of the tools, there is no difference- it only tries to link them up post-version-migration.  So I think that approach is outside of the scope of the OAS.  From the OAS point of view, you're just working with all-3.1 documents (at least right now as 3.1 is latesst).

> An OpenAPI Description compatible with OAS 3.\*.\* contains a required [`openapi`](#oas-version) field which designates the version of the OAS that it uses.

Author: Changed to "OpenAPI Document" which is now well-defined.

### Format

> An OpenAPI Description that conforms to the OpenAPI Specification is itself a JSON object, which may be represented either in JSON or YAML format.

Reviewer 2: So is this about "An OpenAPI entry document that conforms"? 

Because technically referenced documents could have a top-level array that contains to-be-referenced objects, arrays, or primitive values.

> An OpenAPI Description that conforms to the OpenAPI Specification is itself a JSON object, which may be represented either in JSON or YAML format.

Reviewer 6: The original text "OpenAPI Description" is correct IMO. We already did a lot of work on not using "document" when we mean "description"

> An OpenAPI Description that conforms to the OpenAPI Specification is itself a JSON object, which may be represented either in JSON or YAML format.

Reviewer 4: @lornajane but we _do_ mean "document" here, not "Description."  It is not always possible to represent an entire OAD as a single JSON/YAML object,

@ralfhandl 
> So is this about "An OpenAPI entry document that conforms"?

it's not just about entry documents.  This gets into the distinction I waas trying to make with "syntactically complete" documents.

> Because technically referenced documents could have a top-level array that contains to-be-referenced objects, arrays, or primitive values.

No, such a document does not, _as a document_ conform to the OAS.  Nowhere in this specification are such documents mentioned, much less deemed compliant with the OAS syntax.

You _can_ make a plausible argument that a document with an Object other than an OpenAPI Object at its root is "compliant" with the OAS, although the 3.0 specification never directly says so one way or the other.  I'm not sure 2.0 even says that, although it strongly implies it.

So there are really three cases here:

1. Syntactically complete documents (with an OpenAPI Object at the root) — these are unquestionably in compliance with the OAS, regardless of version
2. Documents with some other Object at the root — these are never explicitly mentioned in 3.x, and the proposed OAS  media types _do not support them_ as currently written, but they definitely work in 3.0.  3.1.1 lists the conditions under which they can work in 3.1.  I think of these as fragments (OAD fragments?  OAS fragments?  compatible with fragments of the OAS?)
3. JSON/YAML documents in arbitrary format where some subset of the document (e.g. each element in a root array) is compliant with some or all of the OAS format.  This is not addressed _anywhere_ in the spec AFAICT.  It can work for 3.0.  But 3.1.1 explicitly states that this sort of behavior is undefined, because you cannot correctly process only part of a 3.1 document (there's a whole section about exactly this in 3.1.1)

> An OpenAPI Description that conforms to the OpenAPI Specification is itself a JSON object, which may be represented either in JSON or YAML format.

Reviewer 5: Personally I have never made a distinction between 2 and 3 before.  I have referred to the chunks of these documents that do conform to some OAS object as OpenAPI fragments.
So, in my head there are documents that are OpenAPI Documents and documents that are JSON/YAML documents that can contain OpenAPI fragments.

> An OpenAPI Description that conforms to the OpenAPI Specification is itself a JSON object, which may be represented either in JSON or YAML format.

Author: Changed to "OpenAPI Document", which is now well-defined.

Occasionally, non-backwards compatible changes may be made in `minor` versions of the OAS where impact is believed to be low relative to the benefit provided.

> An OpenAPI Document compatible with OAS 3.\*.\* contains a required [`openapi`](#oas-version) field which designates the version of the OAS that it uses.

Reviewer 4: Now that we have an "OpenAPI Document" section, I feel like this sentence belongs in that section.  When I read this from top to bottom just now the "OpenAPI Document" section felt vague, and this is the part that felt like it was missing.

Occasionally, non-backwards compatible changes may be made in `minor` versions of the OAS where impact is believed to be low relative to the benefit provided.

### Format

> An OpenAPI Document that conforms to the OpenAPI Specification is itself a JSON object, which may be represented either in JSON or YAML format.

Reviewer 4: Found one more concern while porting to 3.1.1:  3.x OADs are not single JSON objects in any sense that I can map to [RFC8259 §4](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8259#section-4).

```suggestion
An OpenAPI Document that conforms to the OpenAPI Specification is itself a set of JSON objects, which may be represented either in JSON or YAML format.
```

Reviewer 4: Wait... never mind, I confused myself.

* Tags MUST be limited to those allowed by [YAML's JSON schema ruleset](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html#id2803231), which defines a subset of the YAML syntax and is unrelated to [[JSON-Schema-05|JSON Schema]].
* Keys used in YAML maps MUST be limited to a scalar string, as defined by the [YAML Failsafe schema ruleset](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html#id2802346).

> **Note:** While APIs may be described by OpenAPI Description in either YAML or JSON format, the API request and response bodies and other content are not required to be JSON or YAML.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note:** While APIs may be described by OpenAPI Descriptions in either YAML or JSON format, the API request and response bodies and other content are not required to be JSON or YAML.
```

### OpenAPI Description Structure

> An OpenAPI Description (OAD) MAY be structured as a single JSON or YAML document or composed from elements distributed across multiple documents at the discretion of the author. In the latter case, [Reference Object](#reference-object) and [Path Item Object](#path-item-object) `$ref` keywords, as well as the [Link Object](#link-object) `operationRef` keyword, are used to identify the documents containing the referenced elements.

Reviewer 2: Compromise:
```suggestion
An OpenAPI Description (OAD) MAY be made up of a single JSON or YAML document or be divided into multiple, connected parts at the discretion of the author. In the latter case, [Reference Object](#reference-object) and [Path Item Object](#path-item-object) `$ref` keywords, as well as the [Link Object](#link-object) `operationRef` keyword, are used to identify the documents containing the referenced elements.
```

> An OpenAPI Description (OAD) MAY be structured as a single JSON or YAML document or composed from elements distributed across multiple documents at the discretion of the author. In the latter case, [Reference Object](#reference-object) and [Path Item Object](#path-item-object) `$ref` keywords, as well as the [Link Object](#link-object) `operationRef` keyword, are used to identify the documents containing the referenced elements.

Reviewer 4: @ralfhandl I still dislike the implications of that phrasing, as I expanded on in more detail in my last reply to another thread in this PR.

> An OpenAPI Description (OAD) MAY be structured as a single JSON or YAML document or composed from elements distributed across multiple documents at the discretion of the author. In the latter case, [Reference Object](#reference-object) and [Path Item Object](#path-item-object) `$ref` keywords, as well as the [Link Object](#link-object) `operationRef` keyword, are used to identify the documents containing the referenced elements.

Reviewer 6: In the meeting, we agreed that the compromise is an improvement and we could accept it and move forward (thanks @ralfhandl !)

In a multi-document OAD, the document containing the OpenAPI Object where parsing begins is known as that OAD's **entry document**.

It is RECOMMENDED that the entry document of an OAD be named: `openapi.json` or `openapi.yaml`.

#### Structural Interoperability

JSON or YAML objects within an OAD are interpreted as specific Objects (such as [Operation Objects](#operation-object), [Response Objects](#response-object), [Reference Objects](#reference-object), etc.) based on their context. Depending on how references are arranged, a given JSON or YAML object can be interpreted in multiple different contexts:

> * The root object of the entry document is interpreted as an OpenAPI Object

Reviewer 2: This now breaks the "As ..." pattern, but I have no suggestion for avoiding this.

> * The root object of the entry document is interpreted as an OpenAPI Object

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* As the root object of the entry document, which is always interpreted as an OpenAPI Object
```

> * As the Object type implied by its parent Object within the description

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* As the Object type implied by its parent Object within the OpenAPI Description
```

> * As the Object type implied by its parent Object within the OpenAPI Description

Reviewer 6: I'm in favour of "OpenAPI Description" here

> * As the Object type implied by its parent Object within the OpenAPI Description

Author: The example we discussed in the TDC meeting yesterday that I think swayed the group to conclude that "Description" is correct here is this:

entryDoc.json
```json
{
  "openapi": "3.0.1",
  "info": {
    "title": "Multi-document OAD",
    "version": "1.0.0"
  },
  "paths": {
    "/path1": {
      "get": {
        "parameters": [
          {
            "$ref": "otherDoc.json#/param1"
          }
        ],
...
```

otherDoc.json
```
{
  "param1": {
    "name": "param1",
    "in": "query",
    "schema": {
      "type": "string"
    }
  }
}
```

In this example, the parent object of "param1" in otherDoc.json is just a Json object -- it implies nothing about how to interpret param1. Rather, the interpretation of "param1" comes from it being referenced within the parameters array of entryDoc.json -- it's parent object in the OpenAPI Description.

> * As the Object type implied by its parent Object within the OpenAPI Description

Author: Hmmm. Okay ... I see your point about the overlap between 2 and 3.

But I still think there is a problem with using "OpenAPI Document" in bullet 2, and I think it is illustrated by the same example as given above.

What is the context for the value of the "schema" field within otherDoc.json? If bullet 2 is about "OpenAPI Document", then it doesn't apply because otherDoc.json is not an "OpenAPI Document" (by the definition we have now added), and bullet 3 also does not apply since this is not a reference target.

If we make bullet 2 be only about OpenAPI documents, then we'll need to add another bullet for documents that are not OpenAPI documents.

> * As the Object type implied by its parent Object within the OpenAPI Description

Reviewer 5: Due to the way the document flow was broken by the comment I had missed the third bullet point.  This contributed to me misunderstanding what the second point was trying to say.

In the tooling my team builds, when parsing an OpenAPI document that has been referenced, we don't use the context of the reference (context 3) to determine the type of the thing beingback to the probele  referenced.  If someone attempts to reference a schema in a location that expects a parameter, we give a type mismatch error. We don't attempt to parse the schema as if it was a parameter.  We would only do that when pointing to a document that is not an OpenAPI Document.

But as Henry states, this is implementation dependent.  Tooling that is building an OpenAPI document editing experience would always use the structural context (context 2) to determine the type of something.  Whereas a a tool that is just consuming an OpenAPI document could easily choose to use context 3 for determining the type of a reference target.

Going back to the debated terminology, the phrase "OpenAPI Description" is problematic because you could argue that the parent object in context 2 is not actually part of the OpenAPI Description.  However, if you say "OpenAPI Document" you a) know explicitly which parent you are talking about and b) know that tooling can parse the OpenAPI document and know the type of the parent object.

So, apologies to everyone involved but I am going to reverse my opinion from what I said on Thursday and say this needs to say OpenAPI Document.

> * As the Object type implied by its parent Object within the OpenAPI Description

Author: Okay, I can see the argument for this. But then which of bullet do you say explains the context used for parsing/interpreting the value of "schema" in otherDoc.json?

* Tags MUST be limited to those allowed by [YAML's JSON schema ruleset](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html#id2803231), which defines a subset of the YAML syntax and is unrelated to [[JSON-Schema-05|JSON Schema]].
* Keys used in YAML maps MUST be limited to a scalar string, as defined by the [YAML Failsafe schema ruleset](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html#id2802346).

**Note:** While APIs may be described by OpenAPI Descriptions in either YAML or JSON format, the API request and response bodies and other content are not required to be JSON or YAML.

### OpenAPI Description Structure

> An OpenAPI Description (OAD) MAY be made up of a single JSON or YAML document or be divided into multiple, connected parts at the discretion of the author. In the latter case, [Reference Object](#reference-object) and [Path Item Object](#path-item-object) `$ref` keywords, as well as the [Link Object](#link-object) `operationRef` keyword, are used to identify the referenced elements.

Reviewer 4: We should add "and the URI form of the [Discriminator Object](#discriminator-object) `mapping` keyword" here as well.

### OpenAPI Description Structure

> An OpenAPI Description (OAD) MAY be made up of a single JSON or YAML document or be divided into multiple, connected parts at the discretion of the author. In the latter case, [Reference Object](#reference-object) and [Path Item Object](#path-item-object) `$ref` keywords, as well as the [Link Object](#link-object) `operationRef` keyword, and the URI form of the [Discriminator Object](#discriminator-object) mapping keyword, are used to identify the referenced elements.

Reviewer 4: Thanks for these changes!  You need the \`backticks\` around `mapping` but otherwise good.

#### OpenAPI Object

This is the root object of the [OpenAPI Description](#openapi-description).

##### Fixed Fields

| Field Name | Type | Description |
| ---- | :----: | ---- |

> | <a name="oas-version"></a>openapi | `string` | **REQUIRED**. This string MUST be the [version number](#versions) of the OpenAPI Specification that the OpenAPI Description uses. The `openapi` field SHOULD be used by tooling to interpret the OpenAPI Description. This is _not_ related to the API [`info.version`](#info-version) string. |

Reviewer 2: We need to replace "OpenAPI document" because we nowhere define this term.

> | <a name="oas-version"></a>openapi | `string` | **REQUIRED**. This string MUST be the [version number](#versions) of the OpenAPI Specification that the OpenAPI Description uses. The `openapi` field SHOULD be used by tooling to interpret the OpenAPI Description. This is _not_ related to the API [`info.version`](#info-version) string. |

Reviewer 4: Not anymore, but I had been using it to make the OAD vs document distinctions I've raised throughout this PR- admittedly, the distinction was not clear the way I wrote it.  But we could easily make our usage of "document" clear along with our usage of OAD. There are many things that are document-specific, and not scoped to the whole OAD.

> | <a name="oas-version"></a>openapi | `string` | **REQUIRED**. This string MUST be the [version number](#versions) of the OpenAPI Specification that the OpenAPI Description uses. The `openapi` field SHOULD be used by tooling to interpret the OpenAPI Description. This is _not_ related to the API [`info.version`](#info-version) string. |

Author: I reverted the change but did capitalize "Document".

#### OpenAPI Object

This is the root object of the [OpenAPI Description](#openapi-description).

##### Fixed Fields

| Field Name | Type | Description |
| ---- | :----: | ---- |
| <a name="oas-version"></a>openapi | `string` | **REQUIRED**. This string MUST be the [version number](#versions) of the OpenAPI Specification that the OpenAPI Document uses. The `openapi` field SHOULD be used by tooling to interpret the OpenAPI Document. This is _not_ related to the API [`info.version`](#info-version) string. |
| <a name="oas-info"></a>info | [Info Object](#info-object) | **REQUIRED**. Provides metadata about the API. The metadata MAY be used by tooling as required. |
| <a name="oas-servers"></a>servers | [[Server Object](#server-object)] | An array of Server Objects, which provide connectivity information to a target server. If the `servers` field is not provided, or is an empty array, the default value would be a [Server Object](#server-object) with a [url](#server-url) value of `/`. |
| <a name="oas-paths"></a>paths | [Paths Object](#paths-object) | **REQUIRED**. The available paths and operations for the API. |

> | <a name="oas-components"></a>components | [Components Object](#components-object) | An element to hold various Objects for the description. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| <a name="oas-components"></a>components | [Components Object](#components-object) | An element to hold various Objects for the OpenAPI Description. |
```

| <a name="oas-security"></a>security | [[Security Requirement Object](#security-requirement-object)] | A declaration of which security mechanisms can be used across the API. The list of values includes alternative Security Requirement Objects that can be used. Only one of the Security Requirement Objects need to be satisfied to authorize a request. Individual operations can override this definition. The list can be incomplete, up to being empty or absent. To make security explicitly optional, an empty security requirement (`{}`) can be included in the array. |

> | <a name="oas-tags"></a>tags | [[Tag Object](#tag-object)] | A list of tags used by the description with additional metadata. The order of the tags can be used to reflect on their order by the parsing tools. Not all tags that are used by the [Operation Object](#operation-object) must be declared. The tags that are not declared MAY be organized randomly or based on the tools' logic. Each tag name in the list MUST be unique. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| <a name="oas-tags"></a>tags | [[Tag Object](#tag-object)] | A list of tags used by the OpenAPI Description with additional metadata. The order of the tags can be used to reflect on their order by the parsing tools. Not all tags that are used by the [Operation Object](#operation-object) must be declared. The tags that are not declared MAY be organized randomly or based on the tools' logic. Each tag name in the list MUST be unique. |
```

#### OpenAPI Object

This is the root object of the [OpenAPI Description](#openapi-description).

##### Fixed Fields

| Field Name | Type | Description |
| ---- | :----: | ---- |
| <a name="oas-version"></a>openapi | `string` | **REQUIRED**. This string MUST be the [version number](#versions) of the OpenAPI Specification that the OpenAPI Document uses. The `openapi` field SHOULD be used by tooling to interpret the OpenAPI Document. This is _not_ related to the API [`info.version`](#info-version) string. |
| <a name="oas-info"></a>info | [Info Object](#info-object) | **REQUIRED**. Provides metadata about the API. The metadata MAY be used by tooling as required. |
| <a name="oas-servers"></a>servers | [[Server Object](#server-object)] | An array of Server Objects, which provide connectivity information to a target server. If the `servers` field is not provided, or is an empty array, the default value would be a [Server Object](#server-object) with a [url](#server-url) value of `/`. |
| <a name="oas-paths"></a>paths | [Paths Object](#paths-object) | **REQUIRED**. The available paths and operations for the API. |

> | <a name="oas-components"></a>components | [Components Object](#components-object) | An element to hold various schemas for the description. |

Reviewer 4: I never realized this says "to hold various schemas", which is completely inaccurate and I assume carried over from 2.0.  The correct wording would be "to hold various Objects for use in the description." (or "Description"?  "OAD"?)

| <a name="oas-security"></a>security | [[Security Requirement Object](#security-requirement-object)] | A declaration of which security mechanisms can be used across the API. The list of values includes alternative Security Requirement Objects that can be used. Only one of the Security Requirement Objects need to be satisfied to authorize a request. Individual operations can override this definition. The list can be incomplete, up to being empty or absent. To make security explicitly optional, an empty security requirement (`{}`) can be included in the array. |

> | <a name="oas-tags"></a>tags | [[Tag Object](#tag-object)] | A list of tags used by the description with additional metadata. The order of the tags can be used to reflect on their order by the parsing tools. Not all tags that are used by the [Operation Object](#operation-object) must be declared. The tags that are not declared MAY be organized randomly or based on the tools' logic. Each tag name in the list MUST be unique. |

Reviewer 4: Same question as previous note about "description" vs "Description" vs "OAD", but otherwise I agree with this change.

| <a name="info-terms-of-service"></a>termsOfService | `string` | A URL for the Terms of Service for the API. This MUST be in the form of a URL. |
| <a name="info-contact"></a>contact | [Contact Object](#contact-object) | The contact information for the exposed API. |
| <a name="info-license"></a>license | [License Object](#license-object) | The license information for the exposed API. |

> | <a name="info-version"></a>version | `string` | **REQUIRED**. The version of the OpenAPI Description (which is distinct from the [OpenAPI Specification version](#oas-version) or the version of the API being described). |

Reviewer 4: We have debated whether this is the version of the OAD or the version of the document, and I thought we decided on the document.

Consider a multi-document OAD that uses a shared `components`-only "syntactically complete" document.  That document is maintained separately from any of the entry documents that reference it, so it needs its own `version`.

I think the `version` field of the entry document is suitable for use as the overall version of the OAD, although I don't think we discussed that.

Reviewer 2: I don't want to go to different version numbers for different parts of an OAD and think Mike's change is fine as we don't define "OpenAPI document".

Reviewer 3: >I think the version field of the entry document is suitable for use as the overall version of the OAD, although I don't think we discussed that.
>
AFAIK, we have not.  I agree with this statement, but mindful of @ralfhandl comment about different versions spread across different OADs.  Maybe  we should include additional semantics whereby the version of the root OAD  is the overall version of the OAD when you do not specify a version on a shared component OAD.

Reviewer 2: To me the comments from @miqui and @darrelmiller seem to say the same:
* The version field of the entry document is the one and only version of a multi-document OpenAPI Description.
* If non-entry documents are reached via reference from a 2.0 or 3.0 entry document, it does not matter whether they have a version field; it is never interpreted and references are resolved on the in-memory representation of a "JavaScript" model resulting from plain JSON/YAML parsing of the text documents.
* If the entry document is 3.1, things apparently are different and I leave the parsing to @handrews 😎

Author: I think this interpretation is a valid interpretation for 3.0 OADs. I think there may be other interpretations, including ones that are more consistent with 3.1. So we should let this be "implementation defined" in 3.0 with enough explanation to allow any of these valid interpretations while ruling out any others.

Author: Reverted this change but added a clarification that the version is also not the version of the OAD, since as @darrelmiller pointed out the "version" of the OAD could change when some referenced component outside this document changes.

| <a name="info-terms-of-service"></a>termsOfService | `string` | A URL for the Terms of Service for the API. This MUST be in the form of a URL. |
| <a name="info-contact"></a>contact | [Contact Object](#contact-object) | The contact information for the exposed API. |
| <a name="info-license"></a>license | [License Object](#license-object) | The license information for the exposed API. |

> | <a name="info-version"></a>version | `string` | **REQUIRED**. The version of the OpenAPI Document (which is distinct from the [OpenAPI Specification version](#oas-version) or the version of the API being described or the version of the OpenAPI Description). |

Reviewer 4: Do we want to say anything anywhere about "the version of the OpenAPI Description"?  AFAIK, no such thing exists, but this wording suggests it exists somewhere?  Either way, I agree that this is correct.

Author: In the TDC we concluded that there is no clear way to define the version of the OpenAPI Description. Maybe this is something we try to tackle in a future version.

Reviewer 4: Can we add a parenthetical aside or a note under the table or _something_ indicating that there are no fields for the API or the overall OAD?  People tend to think they're missing something, but they're not.

| Field Name | Type | Description |
| ---- | :----: | ---- |

> | <a name="server-url"></a>url | `string` | **REQUIRED**. A URL to the target host. This URL supports Server Variables and MAY be relative, to indicate that the host location is relative to the location where the entry document of the OpenAPI Description is being served. Variable substitutions will be made when a variable is named in `{`braces`}`. |

Reviewer 4: I think this might also be document.  It doesn't matter for Server Objects under the OpenAPI Object's `servers` field, and if there are no such Server Objects, then we're basically "pretending" that there is one with a `url` based on the entry document's location.

But this gets weird when you have a Path Item Object in a referenced document that defines its own `servers`, or that has Operation Objects that define their own `servers` (or a Link Object that defines `server`).  I think those ought to be relevant to the location of the document in which they appear.

In "Resolving Implicit Connections", I hand-waved the Servers problem on the grounds that only the entry document's Paths Object is relevant.  But with a shared Path Item Object under the Components Object of a components-only "syntactically complete" document, do you look up the default by current document or by entry document?  That might actually need clarification.

Reviewer 3: >In "Resolving Implicit Connections", I hand-waved the Servers problem on the grounds that only the entry document's Paths Object is relevant. But with a shared Path Item Object under the Components Object of a components-only "syntactically complete" document, do you look up the default by current document or by entry document? That might actually need clarification.

It would seem logical to me then the lookup happens on the entry document.

Reviewer 4: This ought to follow RFC3986 which would go:

* RFC3986 §5.1.2 enclosing context (OAS 3.0 has always violated RFC3986 by skipping this)
* RFC3986 §5.1.3 retrieval URL of the resource, which in this case would be the _current document_
* RFC3986 §5.1.4 application-specific default, which could be anything we want

Do we state anywhere how to locate Server Objects from referenced (non-entry) documents that are OpenAPI Documents and therefore might have an OpenAPI Object (and `servers` field) in the _document_ root that is _not_ the _OAD_ root (which is always the entry document)?

Reviewer 6: Agreed to keep this as-is, but it needs more thought for 3.1

Reviewer 4: @darrelmiller and I had a discussion and agreed that the original wording ("OpenAPI document" with a small "d") is most logically read as "current document" and should be retained.

@darrelmiller can you confirm this as we're reversing what was agreed in the call?

| Field Name | Type | Description |
| ---- | :----: | ---- |

> | <a name="server-url"></a>url | `string` | **REQUIRED**. A URL to the target host. This URL supports Server Variables and MAY be relative, to indicate that the host location is relative to the location where the entry document of the OpenAPI Description is being served. Variable substitutions will be made when a variable is named in `{`braces`}`. |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| <a name="server-url"></a>url | `string` | **REQUIRED**. A URL to the target host. This URL supports Server Variables and MAY be relative, to indicate that the host location is relative to the location where the OpenAPI document is being served. Variable substitutions will be made when a variable is named in `{`braces`}`. |
```

Retaining small-"d" because the document in question may or may not be a proper OpenAPI Document.

Reviewer 2: Not sure whether the above suggested change is still proposed or now withdrawn.

I prefer the text

> relative to the location where the entry document of the OpenAPI Description is being served

Reviewer 2: Not sure whether the above suggested change is still proposed or now withdrawn.

I prefer the text

> relative to the location where the entry document of the OpenAPI Description is being served

Reviewer 4: @ralfhandl that makes sense to me and I'd support it.  I think it would have bo be a new suggestion?  How about this, which is more explicit about which "document" without tying it to a format:

```suggestion
| <a name="server-url"></a>url | `string` | **REQUIRED**. A URL to the target host. This URL supports Server Variables and MAY be relative, to indicate that the host location is relative to the location where the document containing the Server Object is being served. Variable substitutions will be made when a variable is named in `{`braces`}`. |
```

Reviewer 2: Excellent!

Author: I'm fine with this wording so I am going accept this suggestion.

The singular `example` field in the Parameter or Media Type Object is concise and convenient for simple examples, but does not offer any other advantages over using Example Objects under `examples`.

Some examples cannot be represented directly in JSON or YAML.

> For all three ways of providing examples, these can be shown as string values with any escaping necessary to make the string valid in the JSON or YAML format of the OpenAPI Description.

Reviewer 4: An OpenAPI Description could plausibly be in a mixture of JSON and YAML documents, so this ought to be "the JSON or YAML format of the OpenAPI Document."

| Field Name | Type | Description |
| ---- | :----: | ---- |

> | <a name="link-operation-ref"></a>operationRef | `string` | A URI reference to an OAS operation. This field is mutually exclusive of the `operationId` field, and MUST point to an [Operation Object](#operation-object). Relative `operationRef` values MAY be used to locate an existing [Operation Object](#operation-object) in the OpenAPI Description. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| <a name="link-operation-ref"></a>operationRef | `string` | A URI reference to an OAS operation. This field is mutually exclusive of the `operationId` field, and MUST point to an [Operation Object](#operation-object). |
```
Can we remove the confusing last sentence? The URI reference MUST point to an operation object, that's it. This implies that the referenced thingy exists, otherwise it can't be an Operation Object.

Author: Maybe not. In the Relative References in URLs section it says:

> Unless specified otherwise, all fields that are URLs MAY be relative references as defined by [RFC3986](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#section-4.2).
> Relative references are resolved using the URLs defined in the [Server Object](#server-object) as a Base URI.
> 
> Relative references used in `$ref` are processed as per [JSON Reference](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-pbryan-zyp-json-ref-03), using the URL of the current document as the base URI. See also the [Reference Object](#reference-object).

I think this sentence is "specifying otherwise" -- that operation refs are _not_ resolved using the URLs in the Server Object as the Base URL, but instead using the "OpenAPI Description" (current document). Okay, that is confusing but I think resolving using the URLs in the Server Object is really not what we want.

Reviewer 2: This sentence says nothing about _resolving_ the relative URI and especially says nothing about the base URI to be used.

Reviewer 2: On closer inspection the sentence adds nothing that hasn't already been said in the two preceding sentences.

Author: I agree that the sentence is confusing and may not add anything in its current form. But I am suggesting that we need to replace it with a sentence that explains that URI references are resolved based on the current document.  Maybe:
> Relative references used in this field are processed as per [JSON Reference](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-pbryan-zyp-json-ref-03), using the URL of the current document as the base URI. See also the [Reference Object](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/pull/4100#reference-object).

or something shorter, like

> Relative references in this field are processed in the same manner as in the [Reference Object](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/pull/4100#reference-object).

Reviewer 4: @mikekistler 3.0 only defines one process to determine a base URI, so that MUST apply to all URI-reference resolutions.  That process is:

1.  Nearest Server Object `url` field (under RFC3986 §5.1.1)
2. (we act like §5.1.2 doesn't exist, but it should take precedence at this point)
3. Retrieval URL of the current document (§5.1.3)
4. (we don't define an application-specific default under §5.1.4, leaving that instead to OAS implementations, which is an appropriate way to handle this)

Author: @handrews Perhaps I am misreading/misunderstanding this sentence in [Relative References in URLs](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/blob/v3.0.4-dev/versions/3.0.4.md#relative-references-in-urls):

> Relative references used in $ref are processed as per [JSON Reference](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-pbryan-zyp-json-ref-03), using the URL of the current document as the base URI. See also the [Reference Object](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/pull/4100#reference-object).

Doesn't this mean that $ref values use the URL of the current document as the base URI?

Author: Right. So isn't the same true of `operationRef` objects?

Reviewer 4: @mikekistler I'm a little confused.  In 3.0.x, these four steps for finding the base URI:

1.  Nearest Server Object `url` field (under RFC3986 §5.1.1)
2. (we act like §5.1.2 doesn't exist, but it should take precedence at this point)
3. Retrieval URL of the current document (§5.1.3)
4. (we don't define an application-specific default under §5.1.4, leaving that instead to OAS implementations, which is an appropriate way to handle this)

apply to _all_ relative URI-references (which in 3.0 are all treated as URL-references).

The note about the JSON Reference specification does not change this for anything.

Reviewer 4: I _think_ the difference is that you're jumping to step 3 for `operationRef`?  Or did I misread?  Which is entirely possible, I'm just popping in and out of these conversations while traveling this past week and might have missed something.

Reviewer 2: Actually I am taking [4.6 Relative References in URLs](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3.html#relative-references-in-urls) and the statement

> Relative references used in $ref are processed [...] using the URL of the current document as the base URI. See also the [Reference Object](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3.html#reference-object).

quite literally and _never_ consider a Server Object for relative URL resolution in `$ref`, always starting with your step 

> 3. Retrieval URL of the current document (RFC3986 §5.1.3)

Which is also how the quite popular OpenAPI visualization tool that I am using works, so changing this in 3.0.4 would break some implementations.

Reviewer 4: @ralfhandl OK so you read that section as having two completely separate requirements?  I had never read it that way, possibly because I read RFC3986 as taking precedence over wording in either JSON Reference or OAS that seems to disregard how RFC3986 is supposed to work.

_[The below section is a bit of a rant if you're curious as to how I read it, but I'm basically giving up on my reading so feel free to skip to the next comment, and don't worry if it doesn't make sense to you.]_

JSON Schema draft-04 _also_ referenced JSON Reference, and modified it by adding `id` as a base URI source per RFC3986 §5.1.1.  To me, the only sensible way to read OAS 3.0 is that it does the exact same thing as JSON Schema draft-04:  It inserts an RFC3986 §5.1.1-compliant source for the base URI from within the OAD contents.  This usage of the Server Object's `url` field _exactly_ parallels JSON Schema draft-04's usage of `id`.

But I also read both the OAS and JSON Reference as _invalidly_ trying to short-circuit RFC3986 by jumping to §5.1.3.  The OAS also reads very strangely as it seems to try to contrast the Reference Object with JSON Schema behavior even though there is no possible reading of the Reference Object that would have it behave like JSON Schema. I started trying to explain exactly why and how I see that but, really, I don't care how 3.0 resolves things at this point as long as it is clear.

Reviewer 4: @ralfhandl @mikekistler If we accept Ralf's reading, which appears to also be Mike's reading, then we definitely have a problem because this was written without thinking through the fields involved.  Here are the places where we have relative URI-references in 3.0 ("retrieval URL" is per RFC3986 §5.1.3 and means the current document's retrieval URL — I'm leaving out any mention of §5.1.2 or §5.1.4 because the OAS and JSON Reference improperly fail to mention them):

| Object | field | base URI search per text | Notes
| ------- | ---- | --------- | ----
| Contact | `url` | root&nbsp;Server&nbsp;Object&nbsp;`url`; retrieval&nbsp;URL |
| License | `url` | root&nbsp;Server&nbsp;Object&nbsp;`url`; retrieval&nbsp;URL |
| Server | `url` | retrieval URL | _the Server object `url` can also be relative_ |
| Paths | `/{path}` | operation&nbsp;Server&nbsp;Object&nbsp;`url`; path&nbsp;item&nbsp;Server&nbsp;Object&nbsp;`url`; root&nbsp;Server&nbsp;Object&nbsp;`url`; retrieval&nbsp;URL |
| Path Item | `$ref` | retrieval URL | _I assume? Because §4.6 says "`$ref`" and not Reference Object?_ |
| External Documentation | `url` | root&nbsp;Server&nbsp;Object&nbsp;`url`; retrieval&nbsp;URL |
| Example | `externalValue` | operation&nbsp;Server&nbsp;Object&nbsp;`url`; path&nbsp;item&nbsp;Server&nbsp;Object&nbsp;`url`; root&nbsp;Server&nbsp;Object&nbsp;`url`; retrieval&nbsp;URL |
| Link | `operationRef` | root&nbsp;Server&nbsp;Object&nbsp;`url`; retrieval&nbsp;URL |
| Reference | `$ref` | retrieval URL |
| Discriminator | `mapping` | root&nbsp;Server&nbsp;Object&nbsp;`url`; retrieval&nbsp;URL |
| _any_ | `description` markdown | base URI of rendered documentation resource | _clarified in 3.0.4, previously ambiguous_ |

This is rather chaotically inconsistent, which is part of why I always read it differently.  The above behavior does not make sense to me, but it is the logical conclusion of your insistence that `$ref` (without qualification for _which_ `$ref`) is treated differently from everything else.  It's also frustrating because in 3.1 we defined a consistent URL vs URI split, and it does _not_ match the split that this reading causes in 3.0.

I'm not sure there's anything that can be done about this if what @ralfhandl says is indeed how it has always been interpreted.  But we should call out exactly what the split is (just as we do in 3.1, but without the help of the URI vs URL distinction) because I don't think this is obvious at all.

Reviewer 4: @ralfhandl @mikekistler I suppose we _could_ just declare that the intent was the same sort of division later clarified as URIs vs URLs in 3.1, and _not_ literally specific to `$ref`, which would produce behavior like this:

| Object | field | base URI search order
| ------- | ---- | ---------
| Contact | `url` | retrieval URL |
| License | `url` | retrieval URL |
| Server | `url` | retrieval URL |
| Paths | `/{path}` | link&nbsp;Server&nbsp;Object&nbsp;`url`<br />operation&nbsp;Server&nbsp;Object&nbsp;`url`<br />path&nbsp;item&nbsp;Server&nbsp;Object&nbsp;`url`<br />root&nbsp;Server&nbsp;Object&nbsp;`url`<br />retrieval&nbsp;URL |
| Path Item | `$ref` | retrieval URL |
| External Documentation | `url` | retrieval URL |
| Example | `externalValue` | retrieval URL |
| Link | `operationRef` | retrieval URL |
| Reference | `$ref` | retrieval URL |
| Discriminator | `mapping` | retrieval URL |
| _any_ | `description` markdown | base URI of rendered documentation resource | _clarified in 3.0.4, previously ambiguous_ |

Also, in these tables I'm missing the URLs in the Security Scheme and OAuth Flow Objects, which in this table would still check the root Server Obect prior to falling back to the retrieval URL.

Reviewer 2: That nicely sums up my understanding of how link resolution in 2.0 and 3.0.x is supposed to work!

Reviewer 6: We agreed to make one more minor change here, this won't cause a problem in 3.1 so we need to clarify in the spec to make the second table's meaning clearly what is intended.

Reviewer 5: After a conversation with Henry, I have come to agree with the latest table as our recommended behaviour.  We will need to add some text in the relative references section to clarify that the current wording does not match with this behaviour and tooling may or may not follow the recommendations.

| Field Name | Type | Description |
| ---- | :----: | ---- |

> | <a name="link-operation-ref"></a>operationRef | `string` | A relative or absolute URI reference to an OAS operation. This field is mutually exclusive of the `operationId` field, and MUST point to an [Operation Object](#operation-object). Relative `operationRef` values MAY be used to locate an existing [Operation Object](#operation-object) in the OpenAPI Description. |

Reviewer 4: Does this mean that `operationRef` can only point to a resource/document that is _already part of the OAD due to the action of another keyword_?  This is relevant to the text early in the spec that states what keywords are allowed to connect parts into an OAD. (but see next comment in the Reference Object)

Author: I don't read it that way. Though I do find the terminology "A relative or absolute URI reference" a bit strange. I _think_ that URI references are either relative refs or URIs, and URIs may be absolute or not, but I don't think "an absolute URI reference" is a thing. This is the only place this phrase occurs in the spec. I think "URI reference" is clearer and more accurate, so I'll make that change. Also open to additional changes if you think they are needed.

Reviewer 4: "URI reference" in RFC3986 is the most generic term.  Anything vaguely URI-ish (relative, absolute, full) is technically A URI reference (often written "URI-reference"). 

But you are right that this needs to be changed for a different reason:  `https://example.com/foo#/components/pathItems/bar/get` is a URI-reference that is neither relative (because it has a scheme) nor absolute (because it has a fragment).

> | <a name="link-operation-ref"></a>operationRef | `string` | A relative or absolute URI reference to an OAS operation. This field is mutually exclusive of the `operationId` field, and MUST point to an [Operation Object](#operation-object). Relative `operationRef` values MAY be used to locate an existing [Operation Object](#operation-object) in the OpenAPI Description. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| <a name="link-operation-ref"></a>operationRef | `string` | A URI reference to an OAS operation. This field is mutually exclusive of the `operationId` field, and MUST point to an [Operation Object](#operation-object). Relative `operationRef` values MAY be used to locate an existing [Operation Object](#operation-object) in the OpenAPI Description. |
```

      username: $response.body#/username
```

> or a URI `operationRef`:

Reviewer 4: This correct although the whole thing feels awkward.  But not enough to change it- this is good.

#### Reference Object

> A simple object to allow referencing other components in the OpenAPI Description, internally and externally.

Reviewer 4: This suggests that "in the OAD" means "in the OAD, including documents that are only part of the OAD because of this Reference Object", which would mean that `operationRef` above, with similar wording, can also pull in otherwise-unconnected documents.  Is this how this wording is intended?

Author: I'm not sure what you mean by "otherwise-unconnected documents" -- I think $ref is a thing that connects documents. But perhaps to directly answer your question -- I think it is intended for $ref to be able to reference _any_ document, whether or not it was somehow "connected" through some other means.

Reviewer 4: Yes, `$ref` has to be able to do that.  I'm pointing out that I find that the language suggests to me that the document has to somehow _already_ be part of the OAD, but the only way we define to connect things is `$ref`/`operationRef`/`mapping`.  For `$ref` it's (to us) self-evident that there's no other way, but for `operationRef` and `mapping` this wording could be read to say that you can only point `operationRef` and `mapping` to a document that has already been `$ref`'d.  So this comment is really more about `operationRef` and `mapping`.

##### Examples

> For these examples, assume all schemas are in a single-document OpenAPI Description; for handling of `discriminator` in referenced documents see [Resolving Implicit Connections](#resolving-implicit-connections).

Reviewer 4: I wanted to make a point that these are resolved like this in the entry document even if the OAD is multi-document.  I don't feel strongly about this one, but I did have a purpose with that wording.

> For these examples, assume all schemas are in a single-document OpenAPI Description; for handling of `discriminator` in referenced documents see [Resolving Implicit Connections](#resolving-implicit-connections).

Reviewer 2: How about
```suggestion
For these examples, assume all schemas are in the [entry document](#openapi-description-structure); for handling of `discriminator` in referenced documents see [Resolving Implicit Connections](#resolving-implicit-connections).
```

Reviewer 4: That's fine, I guess it's less words than what I had :-)

## Security Considerations

### OpenAPI Description Formats

> OpenAPI Descriptions use JSON, YAML, and JSON Schema, and therefore share their security considerations:

Reviewer 2: This would imply that all documents of a multi-document OAD MUST use the same format.

Which we can't require in a patch release.

```suggestion
OpenAPI documents use JSON, YAML, and JSON Schema, and therefore share their security considerations:
```

Author: > This would imply that all documents of a multi-document OAD MUST use the same format.

I don't see how that is the case -- can you explain why you think so?

In any event I think a different fix should be made. This PR eliminates all occurrences of "OpenAPI document" so we should not reintroduce one here.

Reviewer 2: Ah, I read this as "use either JSON or YAML", but the addition of "and JSON Schema" hints that this is a combination. How about
```suggestion
OpenAPI Descriptions use a combination of JSON, YAML, and JSON Schema, and therefore share their security considerations:
```
